===========================
Migrating to ActingWeb 3.11
===========================

Overview
========

ActingWeb 3.11 focuses on **authentication breadth and SPA/mobile session
hardening**: Sign in with Apple, GitHub and native Google sign-in, native mobile
OAuth code/ticket exchange, and a substantial hardening of the SPA refresh-token
rotation flow. It also tightens an SPA OAuth open-redirect, and removes the
vestigial optional MCP Python SDK.

Most of 3.11 is additive and backward compatible. This guide lists the few items
that need action when upgrading from 3.10.

Who Needs to Migrate?
=====================

- **Everyone on PostgreSQL**: run one new Alembic migration (below).
- **Everyone on DynamoDB**: confirm native TTL is enabled on the attributes
  table (needed for the new token cleanup to actually reclaim space).
- **Apps using the (undocumented) MCP SDK server objects**: a small code change.
- **Split-domain SPA deployments**: set ``spa_redirect_origins`` (security fix).
- **SPA/mobile app developers**: review the refresh-token client contract.

If you only use the core actor/property/trust APIs and the default web/SPA login,
the schema migration (PostgreSQL) or TTL check (DynamoDB) is all you need.

Required: Database
==================

PostgreSQL — run the migration
------------------------------

3.11 adds **one** schema migration, ``d4e5f6a7b8c9`` — a partial expression index
``idx_attributes_chain_id`` on ``attributes (data ->> 'chain_id')`` that makes
refresh-token family revocation O(chain) instead of a scan of the shared token
partition.

.. code-block:: bash

   cd actingweb/db/postgresql/
   alembic upgrade head

This is the only new migration since 3.10; the index is created concurrently-safe
via ``CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS`` and is partial (only token rows carry a
``chain_id``), so it stays small.

DynamoDB — confirm native TTL
-----------------------------

3.11 bounds SPA token growth: a *used* refresh token's TTL is shortened to a
2-day reuse-detection window, and expired tokens are purged. On DynamoDB the
purge relies on the table's **native TTL**, which must be enabled on the
``attributes`` table's ``ttl_timestamp`` attribute. If it is not enabled, expired
tokens are never reclaimed.

.. code-block:: bash

   aws dynamodb update-time-to-live \
       --table-name <PREFIX>_attributes \
       --time-to-live-specification "Enabled=true, AttributeName=ttl_timestamp"

This only deletes items that *carry* a ``ttl_timestamp`` (tokens, sessions,
tickets, nonces); permanent attributes are never affected. See
:doc:`../guides/database-maintenance` and
:doc:`../reference/database-backends` ("Expired Token Cleanup (TTL)") for the
full explanation. On PostgreSQL no scheduler is required — the library purges
expired tokens opportunistically from the token endpoint.

Breaking Changes
================

MCP SDK server objects removed
------------------------------

The optional ``mcp`` (MCP Python SDK) install extra is removed, along with the
vestigial SDK-backed objects that were never wired to serve requests:

- ``actingweb.mcp.get_server_manager``
- ``actingweb.mcp.MCPServerManager``
- ``actingweb.mcp.ActingWebMCPServer``

ActingWeb's MCP support is hand-rolled and does not need the SDK. Configure the
server name and instructions via the builder instead:

.. code-block:: python

   app.with_mcp(enable=True, server_name="myapp", instructions="...")

The internal ``_match_uri_template`` helper moved to
``actingweb/mcp/uri.py`` as ``match_uri_template``. Drop the ``mcp`` extra from
your install (``pip install actingweb`` no longer needs it for MCP).

SPA OAuth redirect_uri allowlist (security)
-------------------------------------------

The ``redirect_uri`` passed to ``POST /oauth/spa/authorize`` is now validated
against an allowlist (the backend FQDN, configured OAuth redirect / Apple deep-link
origins). An off-origin ``redirect_uri`` is rejected with ``400``. This closes an
open-redirect / one-time-session-id leak affecting all SPA providers.

**Action — split-domain SPA deployments only:** if your SPA is served from an
origin different from the backend FQDN, list the allowed SPA origins, otherwise
authorize requests from that origin will be rejected:

.. code-block:: python

   # On your Config instance (default is an empty list):
   config.spa_redirect_origins = ["https://app.example.com"]

Same-origin SPAs and standard redirect flows need no change.

Behavioral Changes to Verify
============================

- **MCP server name no longer includes ``actor_id``.** It now defaults to
  ``"actingweb"`` (was ``"actingweb-{actor_id}"``). Each MCP connection is already
  per-actor. Clients keyed on the old name or relying on actor-specific tool
  prefixes should be re-checked. Override with ``with_mcp(server_name=...)``.
- **MCP ``tools/call`` results always include ``isError``** (default ``false``)
  per spec. Clients doing strict-equality comparison on the result object will see
  the added field.
- **Logout no longer revokes the upstream identity-provider grant.** ``/oauth/logout``
  (and the SPA session-token revoke) now clears the stored provider token *locally*
  instead of calling the provider's revocation endpoint. This is correct for
  Apple (the old behavior emailed the user and severed Sign in with Apple).
  Provider-side revocation is now reserved for an explicit account-disconnect flow.
- **SPA/mobile refresh-token rotation hardening.** Reuse detection is now scoped to
  the offending token *family* (``chain_id``), not all of an actor's tokens, and a
  reuse within the ~60s grace window returns a full rotation so a client that
  dropped a rotation recovers. Client guidance: **single-flight** your refresh
  calls (never issue two concurrent ``/oauth/spa/token`` refreshes), persist the
  rotated refresh token before the next call, and treat a ``401`` as
  "session expired" by routing to the login screen — never leaving a blank page.
  See :doc:`../guides/spa-authentication`.

Dependencies
============

- ``PyJWT[crypto]`` is now a **core** dependency (required for Apple's ES256
  ``client_secret`` and RS256 ``id_token`` validation). It installs automatically;
  vendored / hash-locked environments should add it to their lockfile.
- The ``mcp`` install extra is removed (see above), dropping ~a dozen transitive
  packages.

New Optional Features (no action required)
==========================================

Adopt these only if you want them; none change existing behavior:

- **Sign in with Apple** — ``app.with_apple_sign_in(...)`` (web SPA, native iOS,
  Android, and MCP web form). New env: ``APPLE_TEAM_ID``, ``APPLE_KEY_ID``,
  ``APPLE_CLIENT_ID`` and ``APPLE_PRIVATE_KEY_PATH`` / ``APPLE_PRIVATE_KEY_PEM``.
  See :doc:`../guides/apple-sign-in`.
- **GitHub sign-in** — ``app.with_github(...)``.
- **Native Google sign-in** — ``app.with_google_native(...)``.
- **Native mobile OAuth** — ``authorization_code``, ``jwt-bearer`` and
  ``mobile_ticket`` grants on ``POST /oauth/spa/token``.
- **MCP enhancements** — protocol version negotiation, ``structuredContent`` tool
  output, per-actor tool visibility/descriptions, and
  ``with_mcp(server_name=..., instructions=...)``.

Backward Compatibility
======================

Apart from the items above, 3.11 is backward compatible: the
``OAuth2Authenticator`` refactor to a provider-strategy pattern preserves public
method signatures and the ``actingweb.oauth2.requests`` patch point, and the new
auth providers and MCP options are opt-in. Existing actors, tokens, properties,
and trust relationships are unaffected — refresh tokens minted before the upgrade
simply gain a ``chain_id`` on their next rotation (and legacy chain-less tokens
fall back to single-token revocation on reuse).
